Title: Getting Results
Date: 2021-08-22 9:57
Category: Module of the Week
Series: std::result
Tags: motw, fs, easy, path, files, directories, std
Status: draft

Welcome back to Rust Module of the Week! This week we'll be taking a step in a different direction as we follow one Dwarf's ruthless need for efficiency. A Dwarf who is all about...

[Results](rdoc>std::result::index.html)

<!-- more -->

[std::result](rdoc>std::result::index.html) is the standard Rust module for handling success and failure in a type-safe way. By chaining a series of `Result`s together you can feel confident that the value at the end is the value you want, or an `Error` that happened along the way.

# The story

The Kingdom is made up of several Guilds that have to interact in order for the Kingdom to keep functioning in what's known as the **Great Chain**. However, thanks to the (im)practical magic of Bureaucracy, some guilds don't have strict rules around *when* they do their work, regardless of if the other Guilds in the chain are ready for them or not. Monitoring the **Great Chain** is one of the main tasks for [Lozut Strongmantle](https://www.fantasynamegenerators.com/dwarf_names.php), the Kingdom's Efficiency expert. He has decided that the days of lax rules and plentiful excuses is *over*. 

> If only there was a way to model all of the steps of the **Great Chain**!
>
> &mdash;<cite>Lozut</cite>

Well, my friend, you're in luck.

# Results

[Result](rdoc>std::result::enum.Result) is an **Enumeration**. That is, an Object that can be one (and only one) of several possible values. In the case of `Result`, it looks like this:

``` rust
pub enum Result<T, E> {
    Ok(T),
    Err(E),
}
```

Pretty simple at first glance, right? It means that a `Result` can either be `Ok` with a `T` value, or `Err` with an `E` value. What are `T` and `E`? Whatever you want them to be! Classically `E` is used to represent some value that looks like an [Error](rdoc>std::error::trait.Error), but it's up to you. But how can Lozut make use of this?

He decided to start with the Mining Guild. They were responsible for blasting, mining and collecting precious **Unobtanium**, the most important metal in the Kingdom. However, there are a number of ways that the mining process can go wrong and that can cause delays in the chain. Luzot gets to work, putting all of his observations to codify all of the things that can go wrong with the Mining guild. 

``` rust
/// "All" the possible things
/// that can go wrong
enum MiningProblem {
    SurveyingFailed,
    InsufficientTNT,
    WorkersHungover,
    MineCartsTooMuchFun
}

#[derive(Debug)]
/// How much ore was mined
struct Ore(u32);

type MiningResult = Result<Ore, MiningProblem>;
```

> How delightfully efficient! It encompasses *all* possible things that could
> go wrong with the Mining guild.
>
> &mdash;<cite>Lozut</cite>

It follows, of course, that Lozut would need some sort of way of simulating the work that the Mining guild does so that he could plan out the rules that followed.

!!! Note

    The example code that follows uses the [rand](https://crates.io/crates/rand) crate to generate some randomness.

``` rust
fn rand_mining_results(n: usize) -> Vec<MiningResult> {
    use MiningProblem::*;
    let mut rng = rand::thread_rng();
    let errors = vec![
        SurveyingFailed,
        InsufficientTNT,
        WorkersHungover,
        MineCartsTooMuchFun
    ];
    (0..n).map(|_| {
        if rng.gen_bool(1.0/3.0) {
            Ok(Ore(rng.gen_range(10..100)))
        } else {
            Err(errors.into_iter().choose(&mut rng).unwrap())
        }
    }).collect() 
}
```

> 33% of the time this simulated Mining Guild produces actual Ore. That's better than the real Guild!
>
> &mdash;<cite>Lozut</cite>

Yikes. Let's see what the "simulator" produces.

``` rust
println!("{:?}", rand_mining_results(10));
```

And that gives us:

``` shell
[Ok(Ore(70)), Err(SurveyingFailed), Err(SurveyingFailed), Err(WorkersHungover), Err(SurveyingFailed), Err(WorkersHungover), Err(InsufficientTNT), Ok(Ore(63)), Ok(Ore(93)), Ok(Ore(53))]
```

Not too bad! And, as can be seen, there are just two possible states: `Ok` with some `Ore`, or `Err` with, according to Lozut, some excuse.